 # Background Research & Research Questions
## Organization’s Mission
“The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation is an international nonprofit organization that protects the natural world through the conservation of invertebrates and their habitats.” The name Xerces is based off of an extinct butterfly, Xerces Blue. This extinction was the first known in North America due to human activities. “The Xerces Society’s core programs focus on habitat conservation and restoration, species conservation, protecting pollinators, contributing to watershed health, and reducing harm to invertebrates from pesticide use.” 
### Project-Specific Program Mission
My project team is mainly focusing on the data from the protecting pollinators program. The core focus of protecting pollinators is conserving their habitats and attracting native pollinators. “The ecological service they provide is necessary for the reproduction of over 85% of the world’s flowering plants, including more than two-thirds of the world’s crop species.” The impact of losing pollinators is monumental not to just humans but to animal life as well. “The economic value of these native pollinators is estimated at $3 billion per year in the U.S.” Therefore, not only would food from crops be in ruin but food obtained from most animals would be ruined as well. The main threats to these pollinators are habit loss, pesticide use, and introduced diseases.
### The research questions we plan to focus on and why they matter
* We know that the third of the crop that was grown wasn’t successful what type of grain used in those areas and what type of dirt was it planted in? 
* We would like to evaluate the number of species on the land and check the native plant species versus non-native species. 
* Does the region matter or the size of the land or the type of the grain and the quantity of the grain?
* We would like to investigate the issues that caused the failure in some of the farms and what are the reasons of the failure? 
* We want to evaluate the field level average coefficient of conservatism as mentioned.
* In all those locations what are the proper fields that should allow potential growth?
* Is it possible to know what types of trees around the farms and what kind of farms surrounding the area?


## Study of Organism

### Role of Pollinators in Ecosystem

Pollinator could be anything which helps in transmission of pollen from stamen (male part of the flower) to stigma (female part of the flower) in flowering plants. There are some plants which are self-pollinating. But majority of them are pollinated by the insects and small animals such as bees, butterflies, bats, wasps, moths, beetles and birds. The pollen grains in the flower sticks to the pollinators, when they have contact with flowering plants for food, nectar or shelter. In this way the pollinators transport the pollens unknowingly from one plant to other plant and helps in plant fertilization.

Pollination is mutually beneficial to plants and pollinators. 75% – 80% of flowering plants are pollinated by insects and animals. Pollination helps the plant get fertilized and produce flowers, fruits and seeds. In turn pollinators get nectars and other minerals from plants. Pollination helps in maintaining a healthy ecosystem. Plants are the primary part of the terrestrial ecosystem, it provides shelter, nesting and habitat for different birds and animals. In order to maintain a diverse natural ecosystem, we need plants, this could be achieved only by maintaining a healthy pollinator across the world. Pollinators are considered as the essential element in the global food production.

Apart from providing food and shelter, pollination has some other environmental benefits such as purifying the water, providing clean air and preventing soil erosion. Pollinators are considered as the key factor for plant reproduction. Pollination results in increased number of flowering plants, which produces oxygen by utilizing the carbon dioxide. This oxygen is the essential life component for humans and animals. Plants can prevent soil erosion by holding the soil through their roots. Plants also helps in retaining the water content in the soil and returns the moisture to the atmosphere which results in rain.

An interesting fact is that the shape, structure, color and type of the flower vary depending upon the type of pollinator that visits the flowering plant. This is called as pollinator syndrome and it helps in predicting the pollinator type which will aid the successful reproduction of the flowering plant.

### World of pollinators


| Pollinators|Pollinating Varities|  
|:------------|:----------|
|Hummingbirds|Plants having tubular red, yellow and orange flowers.|
|Moths & Bats|Nocturnal blooms with heavy fragrance and large amount of diluted nectar.|
|Butterflies|Since they cannot feed while flying, they select flowers based on the shape. |
 
|Bees|Efficient Pollinators, Focus on one specific flower at a time.|
|Beetles|Fragrant flowers which is large and bowl shaped.|
|Flies|Putrid smelling blossoms.|
|Wasps|Co evolved in fig plants, 900 species of fig plants with own species of wasps in it.|

Among all pollinator’s bees are considered as the excellent pollinators because they spend majority of their lifetime in collecting pollen and nectar. The bees collect the pollen from the plants through the electrostatic force, it will be focusing on particular kind of flower at a time, which helps in pollen transfer between the same species of plants. Due to usage of pesticides and increasing urban landscape over last half century resulted in declined bee population and mysterious disappearance of enormous bees.


### How Pollinators are studied

In an article by Diane Byers, she discussed the different approaches to studying the interaction between pollinators and plants as it relates to climate change. Those approaches are broken into four categories, plant, pollinator, interaction and network. A plant-focused approach where the researchers uses the measurement of the flowering phenology. Researchers in this type of study may gather data by reviewing historical records, performing field observations, performing experiments, measuring the effects of environmental differences, and/or making phylogentic, the evolution of a particular group of organisms, assessments. A pollinator-focused approach where the researchers are looking at entomological issues with a botanical audience in mind. Researchers in this type of study may gather data by reviewing historical records, perform field observations, perform experiments, and /or measure the effects of environmental differences. An interaction-focused approach where the researchers could look at the interactions of one flower type and a specific pollinator or the interactions within the entire community of pollinators and plants. Researchers in this type of study may gather data by reviewing historical records, performing field observations, performing experiments, measuring the effects of environmental differences, and/or measuring the effects of spring climates. Lastly, a network-focused approach where the researchers use a more comprehensive approach to evaluating the plant-pollinator network. Researchers in this type of study usually gather data by performing field observations and/ or making phylogentic assessments.  

In a plant-focused study in Burkina Faso, West Africa, researchers looked at the impact of bee pollination on cotton and sesame crops. Cotton and Sesame seed crops are known as self-pollinating crops. Both cotton and sesame plants have one-day flowers. During this study, 50 cotton and sesame plants were selected randomly. When the flower bloomed, the study exposed the flower to five different pollination treatments. During the pollination treatments, researchers recorded the first pollinator to visit the flower. After the completed visit, the pollinator were captured and the flower was covered to prevent any other pollinator visits. The seeds were put in petri dishes and monitored until they either germinated or decayed. The germinated seeds were placed in pots in a greenhouse where they cultivated for 35 days. The study found that the pollination by honeybees and wild bees significantly increased yield quantity and quality on average up to 62%, while exclusion of pollinators caused an average yield gap of 37% in cotton and 59% in sesame. (Stein, et al, 2017)

The Elephant and Bees Project is a pollinator-focused study in Africa and Asia. The project uses the knowledge of elephant’s avoidance to African Honey Bees to reduce the damage from crop-raiding elephants. The project uses beehive fences to deter Elephants from destroying small farms. This process creates “a social and economic boost to poverty-stricken rural communities through pollination services and the sustainable harvesting of Elephant Friendly Honey.” During this study, researchers are able to identify and record hundreds of pollinator and which flower type that each pollinator visits, and document the trends and distribution patterns of a variety pollinators, including honeybees

### Recent Pollinator Trends

The Nebraska Game Parks have identified 18 at risk pollinator insects in Nebraska. There are the following: Monarch, Regal Fritillary, Colorado Rita Dotted-Blue, Iowa Skipper, Mottled Duskywing, Two-spotted Skipper, Bucholz Black Dash, Ottoe Skipper, Married Underwing, Whitney Underwing, Southern Plains Bumble Bee, Variable Cuckoo Bumble Bee, Suckley’s Cuckoo Bumble Bee, Hunt Bumble Bee, American Bumble Bee, Western Bumble Bee, Yellow Bumble Bee, and Morrison Bumble Bee. 

|----------|------------|-----------|----------|-----------|-----------| 
|Monarch|Regal Fritillary|Colorado Rita Dotted-Blue|Iowa Skipper|Mottled Duskywing|Two-spotted Skipper|  
 
|Bucholz Black Dash| Ottoe Skipper| Married Underwing| Whitney Underwing|Southern Plains Bumble Bee|

Many organizations within in Nebraska have taken on conservation projects around pollinator health. The Nebraska Department of transportation is trying to do their part in supporting the pollinators of Nebraska. They are performing tasks like planting seed mixtures comprised of 10 to 20% of native Nebraskan wildflower seed in conjunction with highway construction projects. The species may differ based on the region of the state where the project is occurring. NDOT is also funding a research project at the University of Nebraska to investigate dense areas of wildflower also known as wildflower islands and their effect on pollinating species populations. The Extension, a division of the Agriculture and Natural Resources at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln offers to programs to promote pollinator health in the state for the average resident. The first is a certification program. The program encourages residents to implement good pollinator practices in their own gardens and provides them with guidelines for the proper plants that are pollinator friendly. The second program is directed toward elementary school students. The program is designed to educate the students on the part insects play in producing the foods we eat. The program centers on growing Milkweed, which is a plant that is primarily eaten by Monarch butterflies.  

However, Nebraska continues to have challenges when it comes to pollinator health. On June 24th, the Omaha World Herald reported that Adee Honey Farms, a family owned business from South Dakota, lost 82% of their bees in Nebraska. The company had close to 12,000 hives out 82,000 hives across the country. The company felt the loss was too great to attempt to breed bees in the state. They moved their remaining bees to South Dakota. Adee was not the only significant losses in Nebraska. Omaha World Herald article also report losses that local farms and apiaries (a collection of beehives) saw this year. Many of them sited extreme weather, the freezing in the winter and/or the incredible flooding the state experienced in the spring. They also sited pesticides as a reason for the decline. The farms can control what substances the spray on their farms but bees will forage at other farms. Rob Babcock, the president of the Nebraska Beekeepers Association believed that the losses for smaller operations across the state is about 40% up significantly from a normal loss of 10 to 20%.  

The rest of the country is not doing much better. Earthjustice, a non-profit public interest environmental law organization, reported that beekeepers across the country lost over 40%. Earthjustice is currently pursuing a lawsuit against the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) “for allowing sulfoxaflor, a bee-killing pesticide linked to a nation-wide honeybee die-off back on the market”. Greg Loarie, an Earthjustice attorney said “Honeybees and other pollinators are dying in droves because of insecticides like sulfoxaflor, yet the Trump administration removes restrictions just to please the chemical industry.” In 2013, the EPA approved the use of Sulfoxaflor. Because of a lawsuit filed by several pollinator watchdogs, the court ruled that the EPA failed to obtain reliable studies on the impact of the chemical to honeybees. In 2016, the EPA re-approved the chemical with significant restrictions that reduced the risk to honeybees and other pollinators. In July, the Environmental Protection Agency removed the restrictions on sulfoxaflora and approved additional uses for the chemical. The EPA says that the decision is backed by substantial data and ensures that when used according to the label, sulfoxaflora poses no significant risk to human health and lower risk to non-target wildlife, including pollinators, than registered alternatives. It is worth noting that the EPA under the Obama Administration also approved limited use of sulfoxaflora on sorghum and cotton crops within 19 states at least three times between 2014 and 2016.  

The decline in pollinators are not limited to the United States, A study by the Entomological Society Krefeld in 2017 found that the abundance of flying insects had decreased by 75% in 27 years and midsummer population peaks had dropped by 82% in western Germany. The study was done between 1989 and 2016. “The decline in insect biomass, being evident throughout the growing season, and irrespective of habitat type or landscape configuration, suggests large-scale factors must be involved,” say the researchers. (Hallmann et al, 2017). In England, there are two recent pollination related studies. The first, a long-term monitoring study in Southern England found that the average annual abundance of six invertebrate groups had a biomass decline of 35% since 1970, with two groups continuing to decline while three groups have started increasing in abundance over the last decade (Ewald et al, 2016). The second study (Powney et al, 2019), found evidence of large pollinator declines across the United Kingdom between 1980 and 2013. The study saw declines in some specific species as high as 55%. This study believes that the decline is a result of many factors including habitat loss, climate change, and pesticides. The study also found a 12% increase in dominate crop pollinators believing that this change is a result of current investment in agricultural community.

### Decisions, Interventions and Actions

Researching Pollinator health has been eye opening. Much of the prognosis is bad. However, there are things that everyone can do to protect pollinator health. A wonderful conclusion of this project would be to find a way to promote the health of pollinators. This result could be done by finding a combination of flowering plants that can withstand the bombardment of pesticides and unpredictable weather patterns. In reviewing the data provided by Xerces Society, it would be great to show usage patterns within the quadrants that might promote the health of the pollinators. The Xerces Society might develop a model for successful planting process. Also, the Xerces Society would be able to continue educating the public on the need for pollinators and the factors required to create a successful pollinator habitat in Nebraska. 

## Reference 

+	What is a pollinator? (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.nps.gov/subjects/pollinators/what-is-a-pollinator.htm.

+	Ollerton, J. (2017). Pollinator diversity: distribution, ecological function, and conservation. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 48, 353-376.

+	What are pollinators and why do we need them? (Center for Pollinator Research). (n.d.). Retrieved from https://ento.psu.edu/pollinators/resources-and-outreach/what-are-pollinators-and-why-do-we-need-them.

+	Alexandra-Maria, K., Alexandra-Maria Klein Alexandra-Maria Klein, Agroecology, K., Vaissière, B. E., Bernard, Steffan-Dewenter, I., … Claire Kremen Department of Environmental Science. (2006, October 27). Importance of pollinators in changing landscapes for world crops. Retrieved from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rspb.2006.3721.

+	Pollination. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.canr.msu.edu/nativeplants/pollination/.

+	Bicksler, A., & Guidotti, A. (2019, July 9). FAO Blog. Retrieved from https://www.pollinator.org/blog/fao.
